South Sudan has been marred by years of
conflict, much of which has been waged
over the oil fields in the north of the
country.
A week of fighting in South Sudan shows
no signs of abating. Forces loyal to the
former vice president have seized the
main city of a key oil producing region.
Amidst the fighting, there have been
reports of intermittent health scares
linked to deformities and congenital
disease.
I've received a series of documents,
minutes, letters, and medical reports
that highlight the high levels of
congenital disease in the area.
It also unearthed an attempt by
officials to suppress the information.
[Music]
Let me help you that.
Just move this. So, is is this the plane
that you
you use when getting around South Sudan?
>> Yeah, that's a model of the very
aircraft that we were using there. Oh,
really? Yeah, it brings back some
memories.
I'm working for the German NGO called
Sign of Hope. I've been visiting South
Sudan since 1997, but when we are
talking about this specific oil project,
the first trip was in early 2008.
Whenever we met the people, people were
complaining about the bitter taste of
the water. People were complaining about
the salty taste of water. They were
saying our cattle are dying. Livestock
is in danger. So, I wanted to take some
water samples.
Oil was first discovered in Koch County
in the 1970s by Chevron Corp. And then,
in 1997, a consortium of oil companies
from around the world came together and
began exploration in the area. In 2006,
major production began. And this was
just 2 years prior to Stigler's tests.
When we saw the first results, we most
prominently found salt amounting up to 6
g per liter. That's quite a lot. We also
found high levels of um heavy metals,
for example, lead being the most
prominent and the most harmful of them.
The polluted drinking water wells showed
the same characteristics as the produced
waters.
Produced water is really the key part of
Sign of Hope's evidence. It's a toxic
brew of heavy metals, hydrocarbons,
drilling fluids, and salt brought up
alongside every barrel of oil.
Best practice in the industry is to
dispose of it by injecting it deep
underground.
The concern here, though, is that
produced water has been put into
ground-level pits and then seeped into
the drinking water supply.
What we did is established the fact that
the oil production is causing
contamination of the drinking water. And
of course, as an organization, it
motivated us to address the ones who are
responsible for this mess.
[Music]
The consortium of oil companies was led
by the Malaysian petrol giant Petronas,
which entered the country in 1997.
It's a global energy giant with
operations in more than 100 countries.
Petronas is known for its sponsorship
deal with Mercedes-Benz Formula 1 team.
And it's this link that Stigler used to
get Petronas into the same room as him.
They were also saying, "Okay, we can
give you access to this Petronas-led oil
consortium. We can try to mediate. We
can arrange for meetings."
This issue finally came to a head in
2015 at a meeting in Stuttgart organized
by Mercedes with Petronas, the South
Sudanese government, and Stigler's
organization.
At this very meeting, we were confronted
with a threat
that finally made us, as Sign of Hope,
leave the country of South Sudan.
The representative of the Ministry of
Petroleum Mining said that when you
continue to publish your allegations
against this Petronas-led oil
consortium, we would consider this an
act against the government of South
Sudan.
We have never sent any expert back
since.
In a statement, Mercedes did say that it
used its influence to bring the parties
together in the hopes of a resolution.
It's been roughly 10 years since Sign of
Hope last set foot in the country.
In 2024, Petronas decided to leave the
country and abandon its assets,
relinquishing them to the government.
Since its departure, it's maintained
that it operated under South Sudanese
laws and regulations and says it always
met required standards.
This might not just be about historic
claims of industrial malfeasance, but
current ones.
Are there signs of water contamination
today?
And if so, will Petronas or South Sudan
shoulder the responsibility?
It would have been quite easy for them
to drill deep water boreholes, but
obviously they they choose not to do it
at large.
[Music]
This
is a place where cattle come and get
their water.
Between 5 and 10 km from the oil site.
And the locals and the local
administration have told us that in the
rainy season, the pits that hold the
produced water overflow into areas
exactly like this.
We're going to come and test it and get
a sample.
See what it all says later.
On to the next one.
[Music]
So, to give you a bit of context about
this part of South Sudan, it's an area
that's been ripped apart by conflict
over the years.
During the country's civil war, South
Sudan's government carried out a violent
military campaign to secure the area for
oil extraction with evidence of
indiscriminate targeting of civilians.
Once it stabilized, this came in at 2.04
milli siemens.
Uh which is actually quite high. It's a
unit. It's a measurement of electrical
conductivity within the water.
It's just basically a way to quantify
how water
can conduct electrical currents. And it
just shows you if there's any heavy
metals inside the water.
Very pure drinking water would be below
one.
And this was above two.
It's hard to overstate how important oil
is to South Sudan. Roughly 90% of the
country's revenues come from oil.
And that's the main reason the
government is so dependent on foreign
oil companies.
Petronas promised, and in some cases did
deliver, on things like health centers,
boreholes for the local community. But
when I was there, I noticed
the health center just didn't work. The
hospital was on its knees, and boreholes
were terribly maintained.
The oil companies, they bring you water
once a week.
[Music]
Can you just help me understand after
you gave birth to your baby, what
happened afterwards?
[Music]
We've just got some water from the
nearby ponds where Sarah gets her
drinking water from.
She purifies it first.
Filters it and then drinks it.
So, we're going to take this back to
Kenya
and get it tested at a certified
organization and find out exactly what's
inside.
[Music]
There's a bit of a a story playing out
where we see that it's not just a few
anecdotes
and so we've come to this hospital to
learn more about what professionals
think about this issue.
[Music]
This is the postnatal register books
where we register all the mother who
give birth at this facility.
So, especially the case of the mother of
the child who who was born
with no limbs.
Ah, here it is. Baby passed away.
So, within the community or here at the
facility,
we are receiving a lot
of deformity cases during delivery.
Is there any way of linking the
pollution, the contaminated water to
some of these cases?
Yes, there is a link
because most of our community they are
not getting clean water.
They are drinking from the river.
We suspect that these cases are linking
to the contaminated water. We also
receive one cases. The child was born
without eye. There is no indicating or
indication of eye, please. So, the face
is totally flat. That is the only person
is still alive. Otherwise, the rest of
the cases after 2 hours they pass away
or within the time of delivery they pass
away.
[Music]
At any point during all of this, did you
meet anyone from the oil companies? Did
they come and visit you?
There's a lot of confusion around these
issues cuz obviously the community
cannot test to specifically know
how linked this is to the oil industry,
but they are definitely sure
that this did not exist a few decades
ago before these guys arrived.
Still, there is no clear scientific
evidence that directly connects
deformities among children in Koch
County with polluted water.
The government-backed audit looking into
the impact of the oil industry on human
health was carried out by companies from
Norway, Kenya, and South Sudan in 2022
and 2023,
but since then no results have come out.
As journalists, we were given access to
Koch County, but on the ground we
noticed the situation was tense.
When the central government discovered
we had approached the oil facility, they
were not happy.
What is he saying? We should have told
told people in Juba if we wanted access
to the oil facility.
He wants us to come back to Juba.
Mhm.
[Music]
So, we've just had a call from the
authorities in Juba
and they have told us that we shouldn't
film anymore. We shouldn't go near the
oil facility
and they've ordered us back to Juba, the
capital.
In the end, we were stripped of our
filming permits and told to stop
reporting.
Results from the water test showed that
there were chemicals in the water
consistent with drilling fluids. For
example, the test showed that there were
high levels of sodium and potassium in
the water, which are fully consistent
with what produced water should look
like.
Despite a decade having passed, nothing
much has changed on the ground. There's
been no public acknowledgement for the
responsibility of what's happening in
South Sudan,
but documents do show that there is an
internal and private debate around the
matter.
We found a child in the oil production
area called Panyume. He was born with
one leg, very badly deformed. We have
evidence here in the form of letters and
medical reports that this child was sent
to Germany, paid for by the oil
companies. And there's a line here in a
letter written from the petroleum
authority that says there is a high
likelihood that these substances
contribute to deformities of the embryo
in the first 3 months of pregnancy. In
2024, Petronas decided to abandon its
assets following damage to two major
pipelines. Since then, South Sudan is
accusing it of failing to live up to its
environmental standards and not paying
the local community damages.
Mercedes-Benz has a high reputation in
Germany, so we thought that's the key to
success for the people in South Sudan.
Mercedes-Benz can use their influence on
their business partner to perform
better,
but at the end these conversations
didn't
lead to a significant improvement of the
situation of the people who are living
in the oil fields.
The German company have known about
these allegations for years and yet
Petronas is still the main F1 sponsor
for the team.
[Music]